OK, I'll say something, and Bill, say something.
All right. OK, this is Ron Shorn interviewing Bill
Hubbard at Boulder, Colorado, on October 21,
1993. Bill, for the record, would you give your
full name? William Bogle Hubbard. How do you spell
the middle name? B-O-G-E-L, German name. And when
and where were you born? Born in Liberty, Texas,
November 14, 1940. How'd you get interested in
astronomy? Well, I received a book from a friend of
my father's when I was a kid about planets, which I
found very interesting. And I also spent a number
of summers during my childhood in the vicinity of
McDonald Observatory and found that quite
interesting. Where did you go to undergraduate
school? Rice University. Why'd you pick Rice?
Because it was inexpensive and it was a good
school. Oh, that was when you still got a full
scholarship? It was a full scholarship. What was
your major? Physics. Did you take any astronomy
courses in undergrad? Rice didn't have any
astronomy courses when I was an undergrad. What
year did you get your bachelor's? 1962. Why do I
remember you at Yerkes Observatory about that
period? Well, it was partly because I was
interested in astronomy, but Rice didn't have any
astronomy courses. And I found that a way to fill in
my knowledge of astronomy was to work during the
summers at observatories. So I made it a practice
to find out about observatories that would accept
undergraduates as summer assistants. And Yerkes
had such a program, so that was where I went first.
What year was that? 1959. Yeah, 59 sounds about
right. I know that the way I first found out about
this was when I was at McDonald Observatory one
summer, and I talked to an astronomer from the
University of Chicago. I believe it was Hiltner,
perhaps, who told me about these programs. What
were you doing at McDonald at that time, just
visiting? Just visiting. Did you do any other
observatories in any other summers? Yes, I worked
at McDonald the summer of 60 and the summer of 61.
And also I worked at Kitt Peak the summer of 62, I
should add. Where did you go to grad school?
University of California, Berkeley. Why did you
pick that? Well, I was trying to find out which
programs were good in physics for our graduate
research. Then I decided that I was really more
interested in astronomy than in physics. Since
Berkeley had a good program in both, I thought that
was a good choice. And when you began graduate
school, what was your major? Was it physics? No, it
was astronomy. It was astronomy, okay. What did
you do for your Ph.D. thesis, and who was your
advisor? I decided to go into theory, although I
had a fair amount of experience in observing, but I
decided that theory was... more interesting to me
at the time. I started working with Louis Henier on
stellar evolution problems. And he suggested
that I work on the problem of thermal conduction by
electrons in white dwarf matter, which was, at
that time, a poorly understood process. And I was
able to derive a new formalism for that, which was
part of my dissertation. When did you get your PhD?
1967. And where did you go then? I went to Caltech.
Professor Henye had an arrangement. Well, he was
good friends with William Fowler. And it was
primarily through that interaction that I was
able to get a postdoc position with Fowler's group
at Caltech. How long did you stay there? A little
less than two years. Okay. So that would be from?
That was from 67 until the summer of 68. And what did
you work on when you were there? Well, I produced a
paper on thermal conduction by electrons in
stars, which was basically an expansion of my
dissertation work, which was also in
collaboration with Martin Lampe, who did a
complementary study. And we produced tables,
which could be used in stellar evolution studies.
I also first started working on planetary
problems at that point. I started working on the
interior of Jupiter while I was there. Why did you
get interested in that? I discovered that the
previous calculation of the thermal conduction
coefficient in metallic hydrogen I've forgotten
who did that calculation. It might come from
Critchfield. Critchfield's calculation, I
think he was at Los Alamos at the time, it was wrong
by orders of magnitude. And I had just completed
this new study, which I believed was applicable to
metallic hydrogen as well, and used that to derive
the implications for Jupiter based on the new
infrared luminosity measurements of Jupiter,
which were just becoming available due to Frank
Lowe's work. What was the difference from what
went before? Well, the big difference was that the
thermal conductivity of metallic hydrogen was
orders of magnitude lower than Critchfield had
estimated, and it clearly indicated that the heat
transport in Jupiter could not be carried by
thermal conduction by electrons as had
previously been estimated. and it implied that
Jupiter had to have a conductive interior
structure. Where did you go after your post-doc?
Well, I had some possibilities from a couple of
institutions, but Carlin Smith contacted me.
indicated that the University of Texas would be
able to hire me as an assistant professor. And I was
very interested in that position, and I accepted.
So I had my first academic job thanks to Harlan
Smith. How long did you stay at Texas? Stayed there
four years. I was there from 68 till the summer of
72. And what were you doing during those four
years? Well, I worked on a variety of problems. I,
of course, taught undergraduate courses a fair
amount. Yes, I taught some graduate courses as
well, but I also did research on white dwarfs,
oscillating white dwarfs, in collaboration with
Brian Warner and Ed Nather, a work I found very
stimulating. But I continued my planetary
research. I worked on interior models of Jovian
planets. And I first started doing some
occultation research, because the University of
Texas had a very strong stellar occultation
program. Again, Warner and Nader's research and I
suggested to them that their expertise might be
profitably applied to the occultation of Beta
Scorpii by Jupiter, which was in 1971. And that was
a rather large project, which was, I think, fairly
successful. Where did you go after Texas and why?
In 1972, I was contacted by Gerard Kuiper, who was
in the process of forming a new academic
department to be essentially a part of the Lunar
and Planetary Laboratory, which would be a new
department of planetary sciences. At the
University of Arizona. At the University of
Arizona, yes. He was interested in hiring me as one
of the initial members of this new academic
department. And I found that offer to be extremely
attractive. So that's why I went to the University
of Arizona at that point. And how long did you stay
at Arizona? Oh, I'm still there. Oh, that's OK.
What department are you in, or institute? I can't
keep them straight. It is the Department of
Planetary Sciences. The Lunar and Planetary
Laboratory was established in 1960 by Kuyper. And
in 1972,
he started recruiting the first faculty members
for the Department of Planetary Sciences, which
was to start basically a graduate program in
planetary science. There was no mechanism for
educating planetary scientists at the
University of Arizona prior to that point. For
example, Toby Owen, Dale Cruikshank, and Bill
Hartman all received degrees from the University
of Arizona. but they did not receive planetary
science degrees because there was no such
department at the time. Let me change the subject a
little bit now since we've got the chronology.
When you first got started, did you have the
feeling that planetary work, since you've done
both stellar and planetary work, that planetary
astronomy or planetary science, if you want to
call it that, was considered second or third rate
by, quote, real, unquote, astronomers? Oh, yeah,
I think that's definitely the case. I think that
stellar astronomy, well, I shouldn't say
stellar, I should say astrophysics in general,
non-planetary astrophysics, is a much larger
field with much greater depth And much greater
distance. And much greater distance. And they
do, in fact, tend to regard planetary research as a
bit of a backwater. And I think the only reason I got
into planetary research was because I found that
the problems were very interesting. And the thing
I found lacking in astrophysical work, which I
found present in planetary research, is the
precision of measurement which is available in
planetary research theories, and observations
can be compared on a much more precise level in
general. Better than astrophysical accuracy or
cosmological accuracy. Yes, although I should
say that things like pulsars, of course, are
counter-examples. So you think that planetary
astronomy still look down a little bit now, even
now?
Well, I used to worry about that. I don't worry
about that anymore. It simply isn't a matter of
concern to me. I think it is a matter of concern
primarily to planetary astronomers who are
operating in a department of astronomy where
they're frequently a minority member of a large
astrophysical group. And they find it very
difficult to get colleagues and to promote
colleagues and to get resources that they think
are commensurate with their efforts. And I hear
this story over and over again. And that's one of
the reasons why I think the Department of
Planetary Sciences is such a good thing, because
it enables us to essentially support each other.
And it's been spectacularly successful, as I had
hoped. How many departments of planetary science
are there in this country? One. The University of
Arizona is the only one, and I think if you look
around now at the number of young people from that
department who have received degrees from that
department who are now beginning to appear on NASA
panels in various positions of leadership,
they're all rather young, of course, but they're
certainly beginning to have an impact on the
field, and I think there's no question that we've
been successful. When did you first cross paths
with NASH?
Oh, well, it was probably at the, well, you mean in a
formal sense, that is, being a member of a panel or
something. Or getting money from them or
something. Yes. Well, of course, when I was at
Caltech, I talked to people like Bruce Murray and
Peter Golrock and so on, who I presume were
supported by NASA at the time, but I, of course, was
not. The University of Texas, I was aware that
projects like the 107-inch were being supported
by Bill Brunk, and I first met Bill Brunk during one
of his many visits to Texas at that time when he was
still in the business of supporting
observatories or building telescopes. As a
result of some of my Jovian Planet research, I was
asked to be a member of some of the early outer
planets planning committees. I recall one that
was chaired by Al Cameron. I don't remember its
precise name. The name sort of changed from year to
year.
Who supported your early Jupiter interior
research? Or, I mean, a theoretician, you didn't
need telescopes, but you probably needed some
computer money and so forth. I didn't receive any
funding for the first couple of years. At Texas, it
took me a while to get going getting research
grants. Actually, I believe my first grant was
from NSF, not from NASA. I don't recall whether I
ever had a NASA grant at the University of Texas.
It's possible that I didn't. But then at Arizona,
is that different? At Arizona, yes. At Arizona, I
was able to successfully get myself funded from
Bill Bronx. Planetary Astronomy program, and in
fact, I've had a Planetary Astronomy grant ever
since. How do you think NASA headquarters has
managed
planetary research? This is a personal opinion of
yours, but you think they've done it about right?
Have they tried to micromanage? Do they know what
you're doing?
I've found my interactions with NASA to be
basically fairly satisfactory. I find that the
peer review system that has gradually spread
throughout the system is probably as good as one
could have. It has its defects, of course, but
certainly the Planetary Astronomy Program,
which is an example of how things have changed,
initially was basically run by Bill Brunk, and the
peer review process there was not totally clear to
me. although I thought he managed to do an
excellent job of spending his money. Of course,
now there's a very involved peer review program,
and I think it does about as well as one can expect it
to do. Where do you think planetary astronomy
would be today without the money that NSA has
poured into it in the last 30 years? Oh, I think it
would... it would unquestionably be at the same
level that it was in in the 1950s. I think it would
have only a few practitioners, probably most of
which would be astrophysicists doing some
planetary research as a sideline. We're at a
Division for Planetary Sciences meeting of the
American Astronomical Society in the course 26
years ago, since this is the 25th anniversary,
there was no DPS, and papers were given such as
there were at American Astronomical Society
meetings. The published papers were scattered
through all sorts of journals, and in particular a
lot of observatory publications. Now we have
Icarus as an official journal and also the Journal
for Geophysical Research, Planets. Do you think
these developments have been good? bad,
indifferent, inevitable, your opinion? You mean
the fact that we now have our own journal? We're
separate now, really. Yes. Well, I think
planetary research is a rather disparate
discipline, and what we do here in the DPS is very
heavily oriented toward planetary astronomy,
which, of course, is only one piece of planetary
research. The field is still... rather divided
across disciplines, and it's definitely an
interdisciplinary field. There is a core of
people who show up at DPS meetings, but they don't
necessarily represent the full breadth of the
field. Correspondingly, there are a lot of people
who show up at AGU meetings who don't always show up
at DPS meetings. So there's still a lot of division
in the field. I think the DPS is a good thing, and it
has certainly helped to unify the field. Well,
you're an obvious example of the fact that
planetary and non-planetary astronomers talk to
each other, as you certainly talk to yourself. Do
you think today that there's much crosstalk
between stellar galactic and extragalactic
astronomers and planetary ones in your
experience? Well, there's possibly not as much as
there should be, but I think there is definitely
good communication, and I think the key to making
that happen is to have either locations such as
Tucson, where all of these people are within a
small radius of each other, or else having
interdisciplinary workshops or special
meetings, topical meetings. One area that I'm
particularly interested in is brown dwarf
research, where there's an obvious interface
between planetary people and astrophysicists.
Do you think that planetary astronomy is a part of
astronomy? It is, definitely. I think many of the
same instrumental techniques are applicable in
both fields and can benefit from some
cross-fertilization there.
Since I can't interview Gerard P. Kuiper, I'm
asking everyone that knew him, what was he like? I
have to say that I was not an intimate of Gerard
Kuiper. Few were. Yes. I interacted with him
extensively only during the period between the
time that he recruited me at Austin and the time of
his death. And I found him to be a curious mixture of
being very advanced and perhaps even ahead of his
time in certain concepts, certain planetary
concepts, and other concepts were remarkably
behind the times. He, I think, had a vision of what
he wanted for planetary astronomy, and I think his
The work that he was doing at the University of
Arizona to set up the department and establish the
Leonard Planetary Laboratory as a strong
institution was certainly in that direction. So
there's no question he was a visionary and both a
great scientist and a great builder of
institutions. In terms of his personal
characteristics, he was somewhat of a
monologuist. Well, Fred Whipple, who was one of
the few people that could call him Gerard, said,
and it's on tape, and I guess he was Kuiper's best
friend, and Kuiper died in his arms, literally.
And he said Gerard's problem was he couldn't get
along with people. He didn't understand people.
What do you think about that? I think that's a
characteristic that you find among certain very
energetic, nervous people, is that they feel
compelled to fill the void, and he certainly did
that. You have been at Arizona now for a while.
After Kuiper left the Lunar and Planetary
Laboratory, which you're not directly
associated with now, but it's right there. I am
directly associated. Oh, you are? That's right.
I'm sorry. I'm confusing you with somebody else,
Mike in particular. But anyway, when Kuiper left,
then who took over? Charlie Sonnet, right? Chuck
Sonnet. Chuck Sonnet. Uh-huh, yeah. And the
laboratory changed directions. Is that true or
not? That's true. What direction did it go to, and
was that good or bad?
The idea that we all had about the department and
the laboratory was that if it was to succeed, it had
to be encompassing of the, at least not perhaps not
all, but many of the important areas of planetary
science, which would include not only planetary
astronomy, but disciplines such as planetary
geophysics and planetary geochemistry. And
there already were some planetary geologists
there, like Bob Strom, for example. And so it was
agreed among those of us who were the charter
members of the department that there should be an
effort made to recruit people who were not
planetary astronomers, And I believe that Kuyper
was unhappy about some of these decisions. And I
know some of the old-time astronomers who were
there at LPL certainly were, because they felt
that their discipline, which was basically the
basis of LPL's reputation, was being slighted by
these new hires. I think it was the correct
decision. I think it made the place very
attractive to students.
The people that were at it were, without
exception, very good people who went on to do
rather distinguished research. How long did
SONNET last? Oh, okay. You want to know about the
big fight? Yeah, supernova explosion. The big
fight, yeah. Okay. Well, I have to be a little
careful what I say here because many of the
principals are still around. Well, that's like
trying to find out just exactly who was behind
getting Kuiper fired at Yerkes. Yes. Well, let me
just say that I'll give you my own opinion about the
situation, which is that I believe that planetary
astronomy at the University of Arizona was—
greatly strengthened by the fact that it had its
own telescopes, which the Lunar and Planetary
Laboratory controlled. These were, of course,
not first-ranked telescopes by astrophysical
standards. The largest of them was the
154-centimeter
telescope, which was built by Kuiper with Bill
Brunk's money in the Catalina Mountains. The rest
of the other telescopes were lesser instruments
of rather poor quality, but still were controlled
by the laboratory, all of these telescopes being
in the Catalina Mountains. The principal issue of
the fight was that it was believed by Stewart
Observatory that all telescopes should be
operated by Stewart Observatory in the interests
of efficiency and funding possibilities from NSF
and other organizations. And this proposal. And
Bart Bach was the director then, right? No, Ray
Wyman was the director. Although Bart Bach was
still around, of course. Oh, that's right. After
Kuyper's death, Sonnet was faced with the
decision of whether to do as the Stewart
Observatory astronomer suggested, or whether he
should continue as a non-astronomer with the
maintenance in support of these telescopes and
the Catalinas. At the time, many of the
observational astronomers in LPL were opposed to
having SONNET operate
these telescopes, because they felt that as a
non-astronomer he was not fully supportive of
their programs. Furthermore, the fact that
non-astronomers were being hired was a prime
irritant. And so the fight essentially was
between the new guard, which I was a member even
though I was hired by Kuiper, and the old guard over
the fate of the telescopes and over recruiting
policies. And that struggle led to two outcomes.
One was Chuck's on its resignation. What year was
that? Do you remember? It was in 1977. The result of
his resignation was that the telescopes were, in
fact, turned over to Stewart Observatory. And I
believe that this is a development which has had
both positive and negative results. The
telescopes are still fully available to
planetary astronomers and are, as far as I can
tell, well maintained. But at the same time, the
fact that the department does not have These
telescopes that it has to keep busy with planetary
research has, in my view, led to a subtle but very
important pressure to not hire planetary
astronomers with the same priority as it might
have had in the past. So I'm very concerned about
the fact that this may lead to an eventual decline
in the field that we're very strong in. Who took
over? Who was the department head? after Kuyper
died. I assume he was the first department head.
Kuyper was actually, I don't think he was the first
department head. The department did not come into
existence. It was not chartered by the Board of
Regents until Kuyper, I believe, had already
resigned as director of LPL. Chuck Sonnet was the
first head of of the Planetary Sciences
Department, and he was the second director of LPL.
Sonnet resigned, as I said, in 1977, and the
laboratory asked me to become director as a
compromise in the sense that I was marginally
acceptable to both camps. So I was a reluctant
director of the Lunar and Planetary Laboratory
and head of Planetary Sciences for four years
during this transitional period in which the
department was adjusting to the loss of the
telescopes and defining itself further. Who took
over after you managed to get out? I suggested
Laurel Wilkening as my successor because I felt
that she would be acceptable also to the various
factions in the laboratory, and that proved to be
the case. However, she didn't stay in as director
very long. I think it was only about a year and a
half. It took over after her. Gene Levy, who is the
current director. In fact, Levy has been in, I
think, probably about as long as Kuyper by now, or
getting pretty close to it. It was revolving.
Dora's there for a while, for a little bit. Well, it
was revolving in the sense that there was some
rapid change of leadership, but it was not an
unstable situation. These were orderly
transitions. Let me change the subject. From your
personal viewpoint, what does the public think of
when you tell them you're an astronomer? What's
the reaction? Do they think it's good? Do they
think you're a leech or what? Well, it's
interesting, since you're asking me because I'm
at the University of Arizona. And as you are
probably aware, there's been this long, bitter
struggle over Mount Graham in Arizona. And I find
that in many cases, people on the street or people
that I meet in various contexts express their
annoyance at the way the Mount Graham development
has been handled and their annoyance at
astronomy. And I assure them, and this is perhaps
the only good thing about the loss of the
telescopes, I can assure them that I have nothing
whatever to do with this, that it's being handled
out of Stewart Observatory. And I think that what
we have to bear in mind is that as astronomers we
don't produce anything that's of palpable
economic value, and that we have to make sure that
what we do does not alienate the public. And the
benefits that they accrue I think are apparent,
but they can be overweighed by things that we do
that portray arrogance or lack of concern about
what the public thinks about what we're doing.
What's the best piece of work you've done? Well,
I'm pretty proud of the work that I did on Jupiter
that I mentioned. Some
of the occultation research that I've carried out
I'm rather proud of. We were among the groups which
first detected the Neptunian ring arcs. and
identified them for what they were, and were able
to deliver this information prior to the Voyager
encounter with Neptune, which I think was
sufficiently influential that it enabled
Carolyn Porco, for example, to convince the
Voyager 2 team to point the cameras in the right
place to detect these ring arcs. One little thing I
think that it's probably worth mentioning
connection with Gerard Kuiper is that in 1981,
Harold Reitzema, Dave Tholen, Larry Lebowski,
and I observed using the former LPL telescopes in
the Catalinas. This was, of course, after the
telescopes had been turned over to Stuart, but we
were using Kuiper's telescope. Harold Reitzema
and I were on the 61-inch And we detected a third
Neptunian ring, which is now called, not ring,
satellite, which was subsequently named
Larissa. And I felt a great satisfaction in
finding a new satellite of Neptune. Of course,
Kuiper discovered Nereid, the second satellite.
But I felt great satisfaction in detecting this
new satellite with Kuiper's telescope. Do you
ever have any dead ends, misfires, things you wish
you would not have gotten into? Well, I certainly
didn't enjoy being head of the department and
director of Lunar and Planetary Laboratory, and I
often wonder what would have happened if I'd
turned that down. Probably nothing bad would have
happened to me. I'm not sure about the laboratory.
Well, you are in this situation. Somebody that
looks pretty sharp comes up and says, gee, I want to
be a planetary astronomer right now. We're
obviously at the start of another big funding
crunch like happened in 73 and 81. What do you tell
the students? Yes, no, or what? I think students
have to have a pretty tough attitude these days.
The analogy that unfortunately comes to mind is
baby tortoises. They hatch out at a great rate, but
most of them perish, and that may be the situation
we're in right now with tortoises. planetary
scientists and also with astronomers, only the
very best are going to succeed and survive in the
long term doing what they currently plan to do.
Well, I guess come to think of it, it's just like
astronomy in general before the space age, before
Sputnik. I mean, you know, there just aren't a
whole lot of jobs.
None of the principles are alive, I believe, so I
just have to ask people. At the turn of the century,
planetary astronomy was a respectable part of
astronomy. Henry Norris Russell did work on the
Venus atmosphere. By the end of World War II, it was
basically dead. What killed it, or who killed it? I
don't think it was anybody's decision to kill it. I
don't think there was an attempt to do that by
anybody. I think that it was... the lack of tools
for precise
work, and also the lack of tools for interesting
new discoveries, which basically sent the field
into a period of suspended animation for all that
period of time. Well, the point was, of course,
there was essentially no infrared. And that's
where the spectral features are of interest, most
of them. And photometry was not very good. Well,
radar astronomy. Radio, planetary radio
astronomy, one can go on and on. But basically, the
very limited spectrum and the very limited
resolution which was available were the things
that made planetary astronomy not able to
progress very well. Gerard de Vaucouleur had an
emphatic two-word answer to that question.
Percival Lowell. Do you think that had an effect as
well? You mean a negative influence on planetary
astronomy? No, I don't think so. I think Percival
Lowell deserves a lot of credit. I mean, after all,
the planet Pluto was discovered as a result of his
investment of time and money. Do you think that the
fact that we haven't been able to find any evidence
of life anywhere in the solar system so far, in
particular on Mars, has had a depressing effect on
public interest and funding? I think as I study the
field more and as I learn more about modern
concepts of chaos and applications of that theory
to biology and to planetary systems, the more I
realize that the borderline between life and
non-life is very fuzzy indeed. And if you look
through the solar system, you'll find many
examples of survival of the fittest, for example,
as well as systems which are in very unlikely
states, highly organized, unlikely states. And I
think that we have to be careful about what we mean
by life. And I think it's not at all excluded that
we'll discover life in some fashion in the solar
system. Just looking at, I mean, we've learned a
lot about the planets and satellites and so forth
in the last 30 years. What do you think is the most
important thing? And I'll give you my particular
one, just to give you an example, is that we used to
think you had gas giants and then rocks. And now
we've found there's this whole other kind of
planet, namely the icy ones, that no one ever
thought of before. That's my candidate. What's
yours? Most important discovery in planetary
science. Or change of thinking, either one or
another one. I think the most important change in
thinking that we have, in my view, which I think is
mirrored also in astrophysics, is the discovery
that we're in a dynamic situation, that we live in a
system which is evolving on all kinds of time
scales and spatial scales in a very complex
manner. And it's not a quiescent clockwork system
which is frozen into some sort of state, which it's
been in for eons. So it's not the Laplace-Lagrange
universe that once was. That's right.
There's been a lot of attention lately to things
like making planetary astronomy practical. A lot
of publicity of killer asteroids and comets, the
ozone layer depletion, global warming. Do you
think that's been overdone, or do you think that
it's good science, and so what if it's popular?
Let's get the money and work on it. My visceral
reaction is that it's kind of nauseating. I don't
like self-serving hype. I think there's a lot of
that, and I think the so-called killer asteroid
concept is definitely in that category. I spend a
lot of time on this subject with my undergraduate
classes because it inevitably comes up, and what I
tell them is that one's risks of being killed
within the next year, say, can be calculated
quantitatively from a variety of threats, and
certainly the biggest threat is a drunk driver,
and killer asteroids are way down the list, as are
many of the other threats that you've mentioned.
Science in general has a bad name, you know, make
nuclear weapons and everything, and for some
reason astronomers, including planetary
astronomers, seem to have escaped that.
Do you think that's true? Well, they might have
escaped that prior to Mount Graham. I think that
problems like Mount Graham unfortunately tend to
lump us in the same category as the other
scientific efforts which are considered to be bad
for humanity.
But I think Science doesn't have any particular
moral orientation, and it can be applied in a
variety of ways, some of which are beneficial and
some aren't. Well, in general, but also in
particular on the Mount Graham issue, because
you're in the crossfire whether you're actually
part of it or not, do you think astronomers in
general and planetary scientists in particular
have done as good a job as they could have in selling
themselves to the public? As I say, we have to bear
in mind that what we produce is of no direct benefit
to humanity in the sense that it does not have
obvious economic value. I think attempts to link
it to obvious economic value are not appropriate.
I think that what we have successfully done, what
we should continue to do, is to amaze, thrill,
inspire people the public with our discoveries
and as long as we do a good job of that i think we're
okay you think planetary science is kind of mined
out i mean you think all the big things have been
found all the spectacular stuff or no no not at all i
think what's the direction we're moving in is that
planetary science is moving in the direction of
planetary geophysics uh within c2 measurements
or with precise remote measurements in various
ways, we were able to achieve precision of
measurement and wealth of detail of measurement
which are comparable to those which are now
available to geophysicists. So what we have
basically is an array of Earths, of objects which
are as complex and about which we'll have the same
sort of detailed knowledge that we have about the
Earth. And of course, there are scores of such
objects. So I think we're going to enter a whole new
era in the next century. Here's a leading
question. But were you surprised when it became
obvious that little icy satellites of other
planets really had a history, and they just didn't
form and sit there forever? Were you surprised at
that? No. I mean, this is part of what I mentioned
before, which is, I think, that we have now learned
that the solar system is a system which is evolving
in a very complex manner, even at present. And
certainly, some of the outer planet satellites
are much more interesting than the moon. The moon
turns out to be a rather dull place in comparison,
but in my view, it's still a very interesting place
as well.
I'd say keep in touch with reality by having to
teach undergrads. Well,
is enrollment up, down, interest up, down over the
last 10 or 20 years? Or what's the situation at
Arizona, at least? I find that we get a lot of
interest from undergraduates. They're not as
well prepared in many cases as one would like. But I
think interest is as high as ever.
One more thing. My personal opinion is that
planetary astronomy starts with the Venus
tablets from the dynasty of Hammurabi when they
give observations of when Venus was first visible
in the west after sunset and last visible in the
east before sunrise and so forth. There are other
people that claim that planetary astronomy only
began when Galileo first pointed his telescope
at, say, Jupiter and Venus. When do you think
planetary astronomy began? Planetary astronomy
was the start of astronomy. The first things that
were understood in any sense were the planets. And
so that dates back basically to the first naked eye
observations of moving objects in the sky, which
were planets. So definitely I agree with you.